okay hello everyone and welcome to
enterprise IT state of the union at WWDC
for night for 2004 I'm bud tribble I'm
vice president of software technology
for Apple and about one year ago I stood
up here and I talked about apples
approach to the enterprise market and
we've had a very exciting year lots of
products introduced lots of new partners
lots of solutions I'd like to start out
by sharing that with some of you now
Apple's approach to the enterprise is
actually very simple we start with an
open standards approach we leverage open
source software but Apple integrates it
to make it easy to use the result is the
power of UNIX of the simplicity of a Mac
now a perfect example of that is Mac
os10 server this is a panther server I'm
talking about right now it's open source
made easy it epitomizes our approach
again industry standards like BSD an
open-source implementation like Darwin
which is a open source implementation of
BS d+ mock additional open source
integrated in by Apple what that does is
that lets Apple focus all of our efforts
and our innovation on integration to
make mac OS x server easy to use easy to
deploy easy to manage and easy to
develop for now we don't just integrate
a few open source projects we integrate
in Panther over 80 open source projects
things like apache tomcat mysql j box
etc etc now these are things that on
other systems you would spend a lot of
time downloading packages getting the
packages installed we integrate together
to the point where to get a mail service
running it's a single single click of a
checkbox that's apples added value so
these of use ease of deployment ease of
management
now just simple example of this let's
take a look at our mail server on the
server side we integrate postfix which
is an open-source smtp server cyrus
because the imap server and a berkeley
DB back in for the mail indexes we don't
stop there we also integrate scroll mail
which is a webmail interface that's
based on PHP so we integrate PHP as well
we integrate mailman for a lip server
which is built on Python so we integrate
Python as well and we don't stop there
for security we provide openssl so that
you can have SSL authentication for imap
we integrate openldap so you can have
ldap authorization for your mail all of
this is packaged in such a way that for
the sysadmin again a single check of a
check box turns all this on and it runs
right out of the box now I want to take
a moment to just focus on that last
issue security because in our role as as
integrating all of this open source
functionality we pay a lot of attention
to security at the core OS level we're
doing a lot of things we're taking our
complete package and we're doing what's
called Crom Common Criteria
certification a tal level three this is
a government program sponsored by NIFT
to make sure that kind of all your T's
are crossing your eyes r dot in terms of
security and is actually requirement for
selling into many government accounts
these days for data security we provide
full 128-bit aes encryption we also
implement secure delete including the
secure delete that supposedly the NSA
can to recover your bits off the disk i
think we righted 21 times or something
like that network transferred security
layer mail services available through
FSL version 3 single sign-on with
kerberos a whole variety of security
features but equally important what we
do over time is as the
we source community uncovers issues
there are security issues we put those
patches together package them up as
updates and get them out to you and we
hope a timely matter we're thinking
we're actually getting recently good at
this and one of the beauties of open
source is that the moment someone
reports a secure security issue they
also tend to show up with the patch so
there's not a huge lag there for us to
get those out to people and of course we
have client security as well that plugs
right into the services that are
provided by the servers so Virtual
Private Networks VPNs File Vault which
which I like you can actually encrypt
your home directory provide physical
security in case you lose your laptop
authentication with kerberos again and
secure remote administration via ssl now
like to just take a few minutes minutes
and go over the last year or so in
review take a look at what's been
happening in the enterprise space and a
lots been happening we've really had a
blazing pace of innovation with
enterprise products and start out with
in February of 2003 little over a year
ago we introduced xserve ray now as you
may have heard about this was a
breakthrough product in terms of price
per gigabyte about three dollars per
gigabyte which compared to other storage
solutions out there pretty much blows
them away greatly appreciated by our
multimedia customers who are generating
huge amounts of data but I t in general
as I'll get into further on in the talk
storage is a very important part of any
solution extra of raid is an excellent
part of that October we introduced
Panther server Mac os10 Panther server
automatic setup server admin open
directory to was introduced but three we
included postfix mail without release
and as well as jboss a lot of features a
lot of open source integration january
2005 xserve g5 so dual gigabit g5 or two
gigahertz g5 dual Gigabit Ethernet
3 serial ata hot-plug drives really a
dynamite 1u server which has been really
snapped up by many of our customers in
the IT space as well is it i'll talk
about a little bit in the scientific
computing and cluster space now april
two thousand four we introduced xn and
it's our storage area network solution
for mac OS 10 very important to us it's
a full 64-bit storage area solution you
can store terabytes of data online hooks
right into x serve so you get good cost
4 gigabytes very high performance
multiple clients sharing a single volume
gives you shared Bible fibre channel
storage to the clients failover
multipathing automatic volume management
built-in so that you don't have to you
know move lots of data around to manage
your volumes and interoperability with a
text products so that you can
interoperate with storage on mac windows
linux and unix a great product excellent
for anybody who has to move around large
amounts of data that includes multimedia
and multimedia pros but also IT in
general then finally june just recently
introducing apple remote desktop too and
that's desktop management made easy
anybody who has a lot of clients or even
a few clients to manage needs apple
remote desktop apple remote desktop
gives you remote software distribution
so remotely install packages the ability
to do remote asset management so there's
seven predefined reports that will give
you reports with over 200 attributes of
what is configured in each client remote
administration with the ability to run
remote unix scripts on the clients and
finally remote assistance based on VNC
so that you can actually give remote
assistance to someone running by moving
the mouse and essentially taking over
control of their system a great help
desk
application so again anybody managing
any number of Mac clients at all really
needs remote desktop that's evolved the
glass tube products which have been
announced put on shipping yet alpha
remote desktop 2 and X an are included
in your developer pack so you get
preview releases of this and encourage
you to play around with them take a look
at their features see how they might
interact with your own products so past
year or so glazing pace of innovation in
the enterprise space I think that's
reflected in the interest we're seeing
in this room I see we have an overflow
crowd here lots of people standing in
the back I sort of apologized but
hopefully we'll make it worth your while
just a moment I'd like to take to talk
about one thing that we don't often talk
about and that is when you go to
actually price or products and look at
the performance and the features you
find out that we're a lot more price
competitive and often beat out the
competitors that's not something people
normally associate with Apple but in the
enterprise space believe me it's true so
for example mac OS x server 999 and
that's an unlimited client license so
there's no current tax that's a big deal
extra of g5 2999 that's that's a
breakthrough price for a 1u server with
that kind of performance fibre channel
pci 499 remember when just the cables
were for 99 this is a great product at a
great price extra afraid 10,000 999 that
works out to about three dollars per
gigabyte as i mentioned great price and
then finally x and you're not going to
beat this anywhere a full storage area
network for 999 dollars per node with no
cap on storage size so you know go price
that out with other vendors you're going
to be very surprised about that so not
something we talked about a lot but in
the enterprise space we're often often
the price leader and that's that's
really worth thinking about
now I'd like to just take a few minutes
to talk about in addition to our
products a couple of emerging trends
that we're seeing in the enterprise
space and in the industry in general
first one will be no surprise and that's
enterprise storage so the needs for
enterprise storage are literally going
through the roof here's a graph just
looking at the needs in kind of
thousands of petabytes or petabytes the
needs were storage based on regulatory
compliance and I don't know if you think
regulatory compliance is good or bad but
it's here to stay and it's driving
storage needs whether you're an
enterprise at school a hospital and
medical establishment your needs are
going through the roof sixty-four
percent compound annual growth another
aspect of the storage explosion is of
course digital content multimedia and
here's an example of some of the data
rates that need to be supported and you
know that leads to directly to data size
for things like 1080i interlaced full HD
you know 165 megabytes per second and
for those of you who are doing the math
that that's about so you're using if
you're storing that to an xserve raid
you're using about five cents of storage
per second or about one hundred and
eighty dollars per hour so you'll fill
up your extra raid pretty quickly and it
it means that enterprises are buying
storage by the boatload we don't see
this trend slowing down at all once you
get to or below three dollars per
gigabyte it sort of changes the equation
in terms of backup strategies and the
trend we're seeing emerge is disk to
disk to tape backup strategy in other
words live storage on disk you take an
offline or an online backup to a second
set of disk drives and then for archival
storage you you know finally started
tape at some rate and that leads to a
strategy like this again backup clients
on the network the fifth
that are being backed up backup server
managing the whole process backing up to
an xserve raid which is online storage
backup and then finally over fibre
channel to a tape library where you
finally do your archival storage and
Apple solutions in this space work very
well and work very well with with
existing industry solutions out there
like legato or Veritas or Tivoli or
others and just an example of this sitel
so I tell the leading provider of
seismic data to the petroleum industry
they have over one petabyte of data it's
one of the largest databases of this
type in North America and what they've
done is they've converted from tape
storage for their backup to xserve raid
for their backup so they can have all of
their backup data online so far they've
installed tan xserve raids in 2003
they're adding another 60 terabytes of
storage this year and Chris Hansen from
sitel says this compared to the storage
systems we use before xserve raid costs
about 10 times less per terabyte xserve
raid makes having seismic data online
and ready to copy substantially more
cost-effective another thing he says is
that hey a lot of people don't consider
Apple for their storage needs he says
absolutely no matter what systems you're
running as servers you need to consider
Apple for your storage xserve is a rage
as a breakthrough product second trend
we're seeing out there other than in
storage explosion is cluster computing
and take a few moments to talk about
this now this is an emerging trend but
here's what I think is going on starting
in the 60s we had the mainframe take off
through the 60s and 70s client-server
computing k man in the 80s and 90s and
sort of you know mainframes haven't gone
away completely but a lot of the
computing it was done by mainframes is
now done by SMP systems with
client-server computing the trend we
think as emerging is to move to cluster
computing in IT shops and you're not
going to see it everywhere at once and
in fact the very first place you're
seeing it is actually the first
I saw client-server computing which is
that academic computing at MIT or at CMU
and then it gradually moved into the
enterprise we're now seeing very large
clusters being deployed case study
Virginia Tech I'm sure if you're alive
you've probably heard of it 1100 g5
systems dual g5 systems deployed
teraflops of computing they came out
when they introduced this number three
supercomputer in the world on the top
500 dog or glyph the total time it took
them to deploy this was was four months
about 5.2 million to deploy which is
with a fraction of what number one and
number two supercomputer took for actual
meaning you know when 20th or 150th the
cost so this is a breakthrough
technology we're seeing it first in
scientific computing but we expect and
we're actually seeing clusters making
inroads into IT and the enterprise
market is driven by the very same
reasons that scientific computing is
adopting it it's a Brett better price
performance solutions you have lots of
interchangeable one use systems rack
together very easy to manage if one of
them goes bad you just yank it out and
put in a new one from from a set of
spares vs. a large expensive support
agreement for an SMP system and we have
applications showing up like Oracle 10g
44 clustered computing or grid computing
so you know the pieces are coming
together and we expect to see a trend
here in the industry Apple has great
solutions in this space we sell these
things all the time just scientific and
academic computing market we have great
partners like mera kaam Mathematica
lustra biotech bio team and gridiron
case study colza just announced that
they're going to deploy there in the
process deploying 1566 dual processor
xserve g5 their target performance is 25
teraflops they ran their own custom
benchmark to do this they're going to do
this at a cost of 5.8 million incredibly
cost effect
for large performance needs quote from
dr. Anthony dirienzo at cosa we did a
best value compared as competition an
apple won that competition was based on
performance the power requirements floor
space etc and cost and an assessment of
vendor stabilities we solicited to six
companies and Apple one it's a big deal
it's a trend it's going to show up in IT
again here are just a few of the places
currently in government nonprofit
academics that are deploying Mac
clusters in the process of deploying
that clusters today okay the switch
gears a bit here to enterprise solutions
and over the past year we've had a
number of partners announced great
solutions in the enterprise space IBM
son peoplesoft novell Borland side base
Oracle and want to focus in a few things
that we're announcing new this week or
that our partners are announcing this
week IBM Lotus software so expanded
support for Mac OS 10 clients and the
big deal here is that they're supporting
the IBM Lotus workspace architecture or
framework on the mac client so this lets
them move start to move their brands /
based on that strategy starting with
Lotus but I I expect we'll see other
things following as well this is a big
deal for for us and for IBM and for our
customers peoplesoft announcing safari
certification this is also a big deal
what it represents is that Safari the
browser we all know and love has matured
to the point where it has really become
based on certification by PeopleSoft and
similar efforts in the case of oracle
and SI p and others has become the
browser of choice for the mac in the
enterprise certified with these
enterprise products runs great with them
and as we all know runs great on the web
and it's going to have RSS and all sorts
of new things in the future but we've
done this by concentrating on building
Safari to implement
edge standards number one and number two
working with our partners like
PeopleSoft to get actual certification
for the product novell groupwise full
support for mac OS clients another great
partner for us and now it's my pleasure
to introduce tim haste through senior
vice president of technology for oracle
corporation and he's going to tell us
about some great things that oracle is
doing with respect to the mac OS
platform so Tim come on up Thanks thanks
bud so first nobody panic despite the
fact that i'm sure i am the wearing the
only tie in this building i am a
macintosh user and thanks since my first
128k mac freshman year in college I have
used nothing but including 16 years at
Oracle although then I think it was used
mostly for loadrunner now it is it is
more productively put to use I hope I'm
going to spend a few minutes talking
about Oracle strategy just to
familiarize everyone with who we are and
what we're focused on and then put that
into the OS 10 context and so with that
first I've had a lot of folks talk to
ask me so Apple and Oracle I don't
picture y'all on the same slide together
and historically that's been true but
we've always been very friendly
companies and we've always been focused
very much in the in being innovative
siblings really in new technology and
Apple we all are well well aware of
their innovations and on the server side
on the enterprise information side we've
been very proud at Oracle of pioneering
and innovating new technology as well
and so because of the relationship we've
had as friendly companies we have over
the years tried many times to work to
get
as a matter of fact one of my first
speaking opportunities was just down the
hall here at the macworld expo probably
about 12 years ago 1214 years ago when
we first introduced oracle for macintosh
and it was a version 5 database with a
cool hypercard interface and and ever
since then we've been looking for
opportunities to work together but once
Oracle decided not to release its
database for desktop platforms with
version 7 it just became too big to do
that then we didn't have a release for
the Mac anymore and we focused on it as
a client and so we have many customers
particularly in our education customers
and our government customers that
embrace the mac as an enterprise clients
and so we focused on making sure that
our tools and probably as importantly
our enterprise applications are
ebusiness suite for doing erp and so on
support the mac as a client and so we we
spent some time there but not until now
have we started reading the server
operating system as a platform for our
database technology and the reason was
simply that the the database technology
had become so large that it needed a
unix based server operating system to
exploit and with OS 10 that's what we
have and so what we're talking about
this week is the release of our premier
database products we call it oracle 10g
i'll tell you what the G stands for in
just a second and on Mac OS 10 let me
take a quick step back and then I'll
tell you a little bit more about what i
mean by oracle 10g for OS 10 so first
but mentioned a little bit about this
evolution from server centric computing
through desktop centric computing into
network centric computing it was on this
left side that Oracle was first born and
we focused on providing database
management technology for for large
organizations and pioneering the
relational database management as a
platform for that and then as
client-server grew this is really where
we grew up and we focused on not only
embroid are sore
our database technology but building
tools for building applications that ran
on clients and these two would
communicate over the network well it's
important about this model though is
that the sophistication of the
information system which was really
locked inside the application was on the
desktop it was a desktop centric view
and as much as we like our desktops
that's great but it's not a
cost-effective way to build and deployed
Enterprise Information Systems and we've
been learning that over the last several
years about client-server what we needed
really was a network centric model where
we took the complexity of our
information system off of the desktop
where it's really impossible to manage
and put it in the network where it can
be managed centrally and where it can be
secured centrally where it can be scaled
centrally and so on and this model is
when we entered into into late 90s in
the 1996-97 time frame with a release of
our product that we called oracle8i and
it was focused on making sure that the
that the database could do all the work
required to serve up not just data but
all the application functionality
required to really exploit this network
centric model which cost less and is
easier to secure and easier to scale and
so on and so as this evolution occurred
we also saw a change in the hardware
architectures to support it in the
server centric approach the way I solved
the problem was by making the computer
bigger and the desktop centric approach
the way I solved it was making our
desktops bigger which is really where
the complexity resided but in the
network centric approach we've seen a
whole new opportunity for new
architectures the most significant of
which is this scalability problem we
need to often make our systems bigger
well how are we going to do that well
like I said we could build a bigger
piece of iron and this is really what
went on with couple pads one on
mainframes but also on the SMP world
making bigger and bigger boxes this is
very expensive and it does let us scale
up but only to a point and the problem
is it doesn't really effectively let us
scale down because sometimes we want to
make our systems smaller as well based
on different loads at different seasons
all sorts of reasons and so what we
started to investigate was grid compete
as a paradigm that not only lets us
scale up and scale down but more
importantly lets us scale out instead of
getting bigger equipment we're adding
equipment to a system to allow it to get
bigger gradually what's important about
this is we can start small and add
capability as we go to grow to any size
we want and we aren't aren't constrained
by the physical proportions of the box
really and so we love large hardware but
more importantly now we're focused on
this low-cost way of scaling out
information systems so that we can have
lots of inexpensive servers cooperating
to perform a single task now bud started
to reference grid computing mostly in
the scientific world and the idea here
is actually I have a quick college story
Ida classmate in college named Robert
Morris maybe some of you heard of him he
was the one that wrote the worm that got
loose from Cornell when he was a
graduate student and I we were taking a
computer graphics class together and he
were writing a ray tracer I was actually
to my Mac credits I think wrote the
first ray tracer for the Mac it was on a
Mac to which was not up to the job at
least that's what i told my professor so
the but he had this raytracer and i was
amazed at how rapidly he was able to get
these sophisticated images mine would
chug all night and they'd be the size of
a postage stamp his would go all night
and they'd be beautiful and I asked how
he did it he said one I'm chunking up
the problem and I'm taking this part of
the screen and I'm and I've accounts on
computers all over the University I'm
taking this part and I'm sending it off
to that computer to compute and I'm
taking this part i'm sending it off to
that computer you see where he got the
idea for his errant worm and and he was
spreading the work of his job across
machine but those machines are separate
they are not they're not cooperating we
chunked up the problem and distributed
it to lots of machines and many of the
scientific grid computing problems are
this way okay that's not the kind of
grid computing we're talking about what
we're talking about is really a using
multiple computers to attack a single
prowl
and for us the data management problem
is not Chung keable we can't let all of
us have little separate databases we're
talking about all of us cooperating to
manipulate the exact same data and how
do we make sure we don't step on each
other when we do it how do I make sure
your change is reflected in your report
and so on and so for awhile we mean grid
computing we mean these different layers
first storage grids and but already
talked a lot about how technology is
advancing in this way to make sure that
we can add storage without scaling up
but scaling out as we need storage we
feed it more disks and it can make the
collective storage subsystem larger more
importantly for us is in this database
world and for us that means clusters of
computers cooperating to be a single
database also true in the application
server world where we have now multiple
nodes in the cluster running an
application server task so let me tell
you a little bit about 10 G and how it
does this grid computing when we talk
about 10 G we like to refer to the Ilah
DS ok the first ility is availability
this is the idea that in this grid model
if any of these inexpensive machines
fails from big deal the collective
system is still running and in our case
the database can run even when the
computer or one or some number of the
computers running it fail the things
that are in 10g that are particularly
cool for this is something we call real
application clusters this is our
technology that allow these nodes in a
cluster to cooperate and data guard
which gives us a higher level of
availability by going to another site
the second ility is scalability I talked
about this a little bit already my
problems start small I need to make it
bigger rather than doing a forklift
upgrade by moving this computer out and
putting a bigger one in we just add
nodes to our cluster and it grows this
is great for developers because you can
start with a small one computer system
and then grow it as the need of requires
our next ability is secure ability it's
important that we can at the server
manage the security of
information bud talked about their
all-important common criteria and other
certifications that that enforced not
just how how software works but the
whole development process used to build
it and ensuring that that is used
consistently across the applications you
build in a database means that we have
to secure the information at the source
and so for us that means inside the
server we secure the data with the data
usability is important of course and for
those of you who have used Oracle in the
past you know it is a sophisticated
piece of software it is and as a result
we tend often to focus on those prior
ill ities it's going to be secure it's
going to be high performance it's going
to be scalable and this one we've often
left for last okay and so you needed to
be a highly qualified professional to
maximize the capability of the Oracle
environment well in 10g were focused a
lot on accessing the the power of of the
10g database to everybody and so one of
the things we've added is a is a
development environment built right into
the database we call it HTML BB sorry
for the name I'm not the proudest of the
name but the technology is extraordinary
it's a web-based development environment
where all development happens through
the web as well as deployment ok so the
actual definition of the application is
just data inside an Oracle database
that's rendered on the fly inside an
HTML based web browsers it's quite
extraordinary and then finally and
perhaps most importantly as it relates
to 10g is manageability if indeed we're
going to have lots of servers all over
this grid cooperating some of them today
or being database servers and tomorrow
we're retooling them over to be app
servers then oneself when we have all
this complexity manageability becomes a
priority and for us that means making
sure that you can not only control what
servers are doing what at any given time
and how it's secured but that you can do
it to a rich user interface do
in a way that is certainly in the
macworld you are accustomed to
interacting with your systems so we have
focused a lot in 10g land enhancing the
manageability across the board so what's
important when we think about these
abilities we love to define our
technology around these sort of
enterprise terms well there's another
technology that we think of and that's
OS 10 and just as bud said it has grown
into an enterprise capable operating
system married with the xserve platform
to give it this level of enterprise
stability and scalability and what's
great about it is the grid architecture
that we're focused on across all of our
hardware partners is super consistent
with this idea that Apple has with
excerpts to make sure that all of these
servers can cooperate share the same
infrastructure share the same disk and
so on and so we've discovered that our
technologies are very synergistic and so
as the result we have ported oracle10g
to OS 10 what we've also done is moved
our flagship development environment to
tend to OS 10 as well we call this
jdeveloper it's an integrated
development environment for java
development PL sequel development
debugging uml modeling it's a complete
about professional development
environment that is also been moved to
or 20 s 10 okay the development
environment is like I said very robust
it is it you should think of it not just
as a Java development tool but as a
database application development
environment you can do everything not
like I said not only from doing your
data modeling and your Java development
but everything in between okay and so
this is this is our flagship product
across all platforms okay so what's
important about this is that the 10g
database which we like to think is the
most robust way of managing and storing
your information inside an
prize is now available on this important
platform from Apple which has the same
goal that we had lowering the cost of
enterprise computing while at the same
time we increase performance scalability
secure ability ease of use and so on and
so I'm here to tell you that oracle10g
on OS 10 will be available this fall and
today you can go download it from this
URL okay play with it look there you go
thanks because we run on a lot of
platforms its production availability is
dependent on a larger release cycle
which is scheduled now to end this
summer the next release cycle and this
will be available in early fall in
production but the code is available for
you to download today also here you can
download jdeveloper and jdeveloper the
development environment is available for
you in developer preview release and it
is scheduled to go production in the
beginning of September ok so we're super
excited about being here we very much
enjoy our relationship with Apple we
like to think of ourselves as innovators
in the enterprise around information
management and we're really excited
about OS pen in the X serve as a
platform to showcase what we mean when
we say grid computing so to Apple I say
thank you and to all of you I appreciate
your attention
[Applause]
well thanks Tim and as you just
mentioned oracle10g and jdeveloper
download them play with them now
speaking of jdeveloper i want to talk a
bit about enterprise development tools
and this has been a huge story for us j
developers is the latest where you're
going to hear a lot more in this space
when I think of Mac OS 10 I think of
development tools and I think of not
just a tool box of development tools but
I think of they've ever been in the
hardware store and you've seen those
huge tool tool carriers that have like
three three tiers and fifty drawers
that's what I think of because not only
are all the open source tools there but
great tools like j developers IDEs
starting with of course xcode which is
bundled in the box and you know xcode
continues to improve especially getting
great this last year in the area
performance with zero link so you can
get around the compile link debug loop
with uh with zero linking time fix and
continue which actually makes it even
faster and the distributed building
which changes the paradigm so you can
distribute your builds sort of like
worms over the network great set of
development tools around this the
open-source development tools and then
as i mentioned from third-party
developers so some announcements that
are happening this week borland
optimized IT optimize it sweet for java
to a complete performance solution for
java development shortens their
development and testing cycles improves
your reliability enhances of developer
productivity eclipse which eclipse.org
just announced last week availability of
eclipse their support for eclipse on mac
OS 10 which is big news and i believe
it's now available for download this
week from from eclipse.org so an open
source oee for java and last but not
least i want to introduce the father of
java james gosling vice president
percent
operation is going to come up and tell
us some of the great things that are
coming out of Sun for the mac OS and
development community so James
hello I don't actually need this that's
right I'm actually going to drive my own
computer here so as you may have noticed
there's another conference going on here
and it's sort of it's sort of
entertaining i mean i i'm a i'm a happy
mac user this this machine is not loaned
by Apple I actually had to pay money for
this one and it has got many many miles
on it I drag it around and I and I love
it dearly so I'm going to talk to you a
little bit about what's going on in the
Java world try to try to do this to the
voice of a quick summary and a lot of of
what we do at in the in the Java
universe is sort of about this this kind
of picture of sort of ubiquitous
computing right there's been this sort
of evolution from desktops the server is
to to a lot lots of lots of little
devices on the edges connected to things
in the middle to databases and various
things that you know transduce miss or
that and you know fairly fairly wide
ranging sets of things so for example
this is this is my you know son ID card
you need to notice there's a little
little metallic pad that this is a smart
card this is a got a got a cpu on it
that's this is a java java smart card
there are about six and a half or 650
million Java smart cards out there in
the world today they're used all over
the place and you can actually run real
live java code on here there's it does
the new generation ones do like you know
all kinds of fancy encryption and
networking and you know it's just it's
amazing what you can do with these
things you know the you know the other
really common Network note in our
universes is one of these this is a this
is a nokia cell phone this is this one
has this is this one is actually a java
multiprocessor
because if all gsm phones have what were
called tim cards in the gym card czar
smart cards and all the GSM SIM cards
are Java cards plus which the main
processor does does java this is
actually a fairly modern one that it
uses a standard called mid pito and so
that the the software for these things
is kind of dominated by games as one
would expect I suppose it's like
ninety-five percent games but there's
but the market for four games on cell
phones last year was about four billion
dollars well you know which is you know
not exactly chump change and and you
know it is a part of the sort of
incredible diversity of the Java world
you one of the the demos this morning
was the latest stuff in in the in the
automotive world there there's the
upcoming to the BMW's have complete
other that they're complete navigation
and entertainment systems are all sort
of wall-to-wall Java code there's if you
go to the pavilion you'll see a couple
of BMWs that have you know pretty large
scale Java multiprocessors inside them
and they do a really really really nice
job and of course some of it some of its
goofy if any of you were at the Java
keynote this morning which you could
have seen and still made it back here
for Steve there was the the the Java
controlled liquid nitrogen cannon
we're running this what we're running
this contest we do we do t-shirts you
know tossed into the audience and I had
sort of run out of ideas for ways to
toss t-shirts into the audience last
year I did it I did a trebuchet going
going medieval and this year we ran it
as a contest to get people to come up
with interesting ways to hurl t-shirts
into the into the audience and maybe use
a little Java code on the way and so
then we're doing the the three finalists
are today tomorrow and thursday and
today's was a was a truly impressive
cannon if we if they they actually let
them like crank it up all the way it
actually does take chunks of concrete
out of the back wall but we actually
managed to not injure anyone which which
in in the practices last night was was a
big concern so anyway Java's rolling in
in this in a sort of infrastructure that
people have been building that goes from
love these huge enterprise servers to
these desktops to cell phones to to to
all the smart cards it's kind of a sort
of a conceptual framework mina java is a
language language of their ways that
people think and express their thoughts
and and in particular how you express
what you want the damn piece of iron to
do and and the lovely thing about java
is that it actually expands all of this
stuff so that developers can view this
this reality of stuff out there that is
extremely heterogeneous as something
that is a lot more homogeneous where you
can you can really think about you know
programming for your mac desktop as
being the same thing as programming for
your windows desktop and it's sort of a
different twist on the on the sort of
marketing line that various people have
been using the whole write once run
anywhere which i like which is sort of
learn once work anywhere and
and that and that lets you sort of build
build communities that span a lot of
different technologies you see a lot of
IT shops that have you know they did
they don't have like mainframe
developers and point-of-sale terminal
developers and you know VMs developers
and dawes power vs developers they just
did just gotten developers and they
happen to work wherever they're needed
because all the machines kind of speak
the same thing in it and it gives you
this sort of freedom and flexibility
that is that is just a wonderful thing
to do and it really has has made Java be
everywhere there are you know somewheres
around four million professional
developers that due to javas as their
day job if you count like people who
have learned java like like university
students you get like completely stupid
numbers but they're you know it's it's
impossible to measure at this point and
it really is not not a marketing slogan
mean the number of these machines out
there that the speak java is huge
currently we're like 350 million
java-enabled cell phones the vast
majority of like GSM cell phones are our
Java cell phones and you see it in in
all kinds of embedded stops for instance
the the Canon this morning was was was
controlled by a little little little
embedded server it's a little bored
about about this big made by a Dallas
semiconductor that I think they call it
the tiny stick and it's a general to
this industrial automation controller
you download Java code to it and it
controls relays and servo motors and
whatever it is you wire it up to and
there's there's a there's a big
community of folks doing that out there
and one of the things that that does
make Java works so well as the Java
really isn't a product from a company
java really is a community there are a
lot of companies that work together
Apple work so that Oracle works with us
IBM works with us not Microsoft but just
about everybody else but you know they
say they're sort of well known but so so
we're these days we're ahead of C and
C++ we've been gaining on visual basic
c-sharp is you know always something to
worry about and you know a piece of this
has been the desktop the desktop lately
has been you know really fascinating for
us you know we we started really with
stuff on the desktop that turned into a
complete failure largely because of the
way that Microsoft sort of manipulated
the whole desktop market and browsers
and all that knew was you know
litigation and horrible and and over the
last few years we've had a real
resurgence of you know Java on the
desktop there had always been quite a
lot of it but it never really sort of
got outside people were reusing it very
heavily inside enterprises but now
there's there's the look there are a
couple of or three or four you know
really key things that have been driving
it one is that you know if you wind back
three or four years you know the one
crew way to create a user experience was
was by you know generating web pages
people figured out that you know that
doesn't give you a really great user
experience for a whole lot of
applications for some things web pages
work just great but try doing a text
editor with a you know just a web
through through a web browser just
doesn't work and so a lot of people have
been sort of going back to basics and
building really nice sort of full up
apps and of course three or four years
ago there was really only one desktop
that anybody cared about
that was the Windows desktop and over
the last couple of years there are two
other desktops that have popped up that
people actually start to care about one
of them is Linux you don't see that very
much in North America let me know linux
is a big deal outside of the US boy I
just be clear this thing I just sort of
equated North America in the US and I'm
Canadian that's actually pretty horrible
but outside outside of the US right you
see a lot of Linux you go to you know
China Brazil France you know you see a
lot of linux on the desktop and
developers have really been starting to
care about that and of course the reason
that I'm here today is that you know
people actually care about Max's the
desktop they're nowhere near where
Windows is but there enough to get
developers interested they're really
getting you know pretty fascinating and
these days we've got modern JVM pretty
much everywhere as near as we can tell
there are about 650 million desktops of
there in the world that are that that
that that that have sort of modern JVMs
on them and by that I mean sort of
anything but Microsoft and and and and
so when people write java apps they
actually run pretty much anywhere and
there are a number of really nice ways
to launch them these days there's those
java web start and end applets Web Start
is a fairly nice one that it's a sort of
sort of combination of sort of web
friendly navigation and easy deployment
of what are really sort of full up
desktop apps and in most systems that
implement web start and apple is one of
them you know if you if you web start
the same app a couple of times they will
they'll sort of ask you well do you want
me to turn this into a real live
application and then then they do that
and then it's a real loaded desktop app
it's installment runs and your users
have never had to
you know run an installer they just
click the link on a web page and it just
sort of did the right thing and and the
performance has been has been pretty
nice me that if you've watched my slides
i'm not using i'm not using keynote i
actually using a slide program that i
wrote and it's a slide program that i
kind of uses a sort of an experimental
test bed for being goofy and a month or
so ago i decided that you know i didn't
know the the 3d api is very well so I
shoehorn 3d into the into the my slide
show right so you can you can sort of
you know do all kinds of really stupid
things you know when when you know you
had three deed here to teach your user
interface this is you know gratuitously
stupid but there are a lot of
opportunities and a lot of the stuff is
is integrated in there and it's fast
even though so so those pages go go for
go flipping around pretty well I mean
them the slowness is really all in the
in the pacing in it and it works very
smoothly and and of course the big the
big thing in the development world for
Java these days is the current release
it's coming out JDK 15 you know sort of
did the big things in it this year are
some things in the language a whole lot
of new api's and a major focus on on use
of development if you spend some time
across the street you'll you'll you'll
you'll get an earful of that here's an
example of a sort of a small piece of
Java code that uses some of the some of
the new features in particular it's got
the new enumerations facility which is a
very tightly type checked extensible
mechanism for doing enumerations there
they really are objects they really have
a lot of ability to be introspective and
manipulated and extended sort of the way
that classes are it says that they also
have the same performance as
integers the way that the way that
enumerations behaving things in like c
and c++ and then you can see that some
you so of generics you can say you can
take a type like list or array list and
you can parameterize it by a by a type
and not just a you know an integer or
whatever and then there's the enhanced
for loops and there's a bunch of other
stuff in there too but it really does
make things in a pretty nice Tuesdays so
so the so another big area for us has
been tools the tools these days you know
from anybody really are shifting to
cover you the whole development process
not just you know the sort of compile
debug loop that the folks from the Emacs
make crowd are used to doing and and
there are a whole lot of people from the
Emacs made crowd like me who have been
shifting over to using a real tool if
you go back a couple of years and looked
at the desktops of high end developers
by and large everybody was using Emacs
and the Ides were sort of relegated to
people who kind of didn't know what they
were doing or at least pejoratively
that's the way it was viewed and these
days modern ids are you know pretty
industrial strength and they and they
get specialized in many areas you know
you can find one for enterprise stuff
ones for a friend for embedded software
and a lot of their power comes from this
from the specialist specialization son
has as a number of tools are based tool
is something called NetBeans it's an
open source project sort of like eclipse
except that it's been an open source
project for at least a year longer and
it's been available on the Mac for quite
a while and actually where are we
ok no
oh there we go so here's that this is
NetBeans portado I've got most of the
windows sort of closed away one of the
things about NetBeans as an open source
project is you can get all the all the
latest bit so if you go to NetBeans org
you'll find the current FCS release
which is the three that takes release
you'll find the the upcoming release
which is the 40 relief and actually
you'll find two releases of the of the
photo release with something called the
daily build which only Daisy the truly
brave would download and then there's
something called the Q build which is
everyday the the dailies are run through
some through some QA and nef by some
random chance one kind of passes Kuwait
and they cut that like it's called the
the Q belt so this is a cue bilder of
knit beans for I'm not going to really
show you anything about it other than
it's there it's a real it's a real mac
app you know does all the does all those
all the mac buttons and things although
and won't bother showing that but the
really interesting tool for us these
days has been this thing called Kreator
Kreator as a very sort of so it's really
targeted at visual basic developers at
people who aren't really programmers by
trade you know their job is something
else but to get that something else done
they say that they need some piece of
software so so so so creator is is
really oriented towards the rapid
construction of the sort of web-based
applications so just to show you that
the Creator really is a real a real mac
app here it is it's actually on the on
the toolbar and i'll actually launch it
just just so you can actually believe me
and this is actually this is a mac and
the release of created you can get today
runs on the mac it also runs on linux
and unsel eris and on windows and she's
got this this sort of pallet in the
middle where you can assemble web pages
but the web pages are really nodes in a
finite state diagram the the basic
paradigm in your Creator is that you've
got this finite state diagram that it is
use the sort of data flow the business
process logic of your application and
each each sort of know each sort of
place where you stop is up is it is a
web page the web page construction is
all about is all this sort of drag and
drop kind of construction you can drag
enough pieces of text over you can you
can edit them you know stretch them you
can see properties off on the side you
can you can put all kinds of you know
you know buttons will put a button in
there
you can use the property sheet you can
change it if you look closely you can
see that's actually a Mac button that
it's that it's constructing you know it
is it is a you know it's a full-blown
mac app does all the all the all the
really nice stuff the way that you had
components here is it's got this is this
notion of services that you can tie in
when you you you can drag and drop both
both web services and here's some some
some built-in web services here some
some data sources you can drag and drop
fields out of databases and construct
tables I unfortunately can't show you
that because my database isn't connected
no discard go away so it's a lot of fun
there are a lot of fun lot of other some
fun things going on in the Java world
there's a project called Mac connect
which is a real-time system a large
scale real time system so if you have to
happen to be in need of running like a
large power plant and in reading tens of
thousands of sensors a second with about
four microseconds jitter mechanics for
you if your next door and you see
anybody who's Brazilian ask them about
what's happening to in Brazil with Java
it's completely crazy you know things
like Nino ninety-six percent of all of
their tax returns our files
electronically their whole IRS
equivalent is a big baggage of a code
and the front end is a java app the
their equivalent of the IRS built the
the tax preparation program and it runs
on macs it runs on linux boxes it runs
on it runs on pcs runs on all over the
place those joggle the java opengl i
think which is what is driving this the
my little little slideshow guys if you
want to have some real real geek fun go
look at a website called slough calm you
it's got a Java applet and the job of
back-end to let you drive a giant
telescope in them in a top of a mountain
in the Canary Islands if you want to do
an open source project or look in the
Java developer community there's this
this website dev java.net which is sort
of like like sourceforge but it's a big
so a community of Java developers and of
course so the fun thing for me this this
year is the t-shirt hurling contest the
picture here is the trebuchet that I'd
built last year and i invite you to all
come and join us all of you are you know
WWDC attendees you get java one pavilion
passes all you have to do is walk across
the street to the north lobby
registration area with your with your
badge and go to the registration counter
and you complete the online form and
where it says you know enter a priority
code just type in apple and you've got a
badge you can go down visit the pavilion
my favorite place is always the the
jewel case is full of full of cell
phones and there are there's lots of
people there that'll show you all kinds
of like high-end enterprise software
small embedded stuff developer tools
just like all over the map and vast
majority of it runs on mac thank you
thanks Team
[Applause]
Thank You Jane so as of today son has
announced that sun java studio creator
is available on mac OS can and we're
extremely pleased about that and i'm
extremely pleased because having been
you know somewhat involved a number of
years ago in the original interface
builder in the next step days i'm a
strong believer in visual building of
application so creator is a great tool i
recommend you you know get a copy of it
try it out play with it we're very
pleased thanks so it's been a banner
year for developers we have over 450,000
registered developers for mac OS 10 on
our developer site we have as you've
seen a great set of enterprise tools for
the mac over 12,000 application shipping
on the mac so a great year and we think
we're going to have a great year going
forward as well and speaking of that so
today I'm pleased to be able to
introduce Tiger server and I want to
take you through a few of the features
of Tiger server some of the top features
is over 250 new features in Mac OS Tiger
server over 100 open source projects
included if you remember there were 80
and Panther there's we've upped that to
over 100 open source projects first
feature which is kind of near and dear
to me is 64-bit applications now in
Panther of course you've had 64-bit math
all along what we're introducing in
Tiger is 64-bit pointers so you can have
64-bit address spaces for the for your
applications this is a big deal for
anyone who has to handle a large amounts
of data at once and what does what might
this be i was looking the other day
noah's database for example of the
surface of the world with 100 meter
resolution in terms of how many feet
above sea level or meters above sea
level that database when you unpack
it which I actually did on my mac last
week is about 4 gigabytes in size so you
had that and a few other things to your
database and you need a lot of stuff in
memory at once well 64-bit apps in Tiger
is going to give you that we support
64-bit processes we have 64-bit system
library we're taking a step approach
here what we did first is convert system
library so all the non GUI libraries are
going to be converted or are converted
in Tiger to support 64 bits GCC supports
64 bits so for the non gooey portion of
your application you can run right
alongside 32-bit apps running a 64-bit
address space and then if your app is
constructed client-server so the GUI
runs in a client and they communicate
you can actually have a full solution
that takes advantage of very large
memory sets on xserve 64-bit tools we
use LP 54 so Long's and pointers or 64
bits integers are 32 bits this is
important because that is the standard
for unix all the other vendors have
settled out on that being the standard
so if reporting applications between
Linux or UNIX and Mac OS pan that
becomes quite easy you don't have to
have different versions of your source
code so this is a big deal we expect to
see great application showing up over
the next year in this space NT migration
tool for anybody who is still running NT
in their server shop and if you're
running PDC's primary domain controllers
we can now take over that job with mac
OS 10 server with tiger so we have a
migration tool that actually sucks out
all your data from your domain
controller puts it into your tiger
server user and group accounts and you
can upgrade your NT server to a mac OS
10 server and and run it as a primary
domain controller put your users
accounts you your users home directories
so support windows as a client from Mac
os10 server and have a very robust hi
I ability modern technology server great
number of customers are in this space
they're still running domain controllers
they've not moved to open directory
which is a large ship if they want to
move their OS and their server rooms to
a better OS we have a great solution
their software update server this has
been a big request thank you so what is
this this is a proxy cache server for
Apple software updates this mate let you
inside your firewall run a proxy cache
server for Apple software update that
lets you control when your server when
your customer or when your users see the
updates so you have complete control
over that it only displays those updates
to users when you approve them and it
saves network bandwidth because you're
only downloaded once from Apple
everything else is inside the firewall
so a huge request we think this is going
to be a big hit weblog server blog
server based on the based on not blossom
but the java version of that based on
blog some calendar based navigation
customizable themes syndication using
rdf RSS RSS 2 and adam so we support all
the all the acronyms for the ways that
you do this and as I mentioned based on
blog some a great blog server built
right into mac OS 10 tiger and finally
another highly requested feature
i chat server for inside your firewall
and this is great run it run the ichat
server inside your firewall your
communication doesn't have to leave your
enterprise it's your namespace you
manage the namespace all traffic can be
encrypted with SSL or TSL so it's highly
secure it supports I chat and jabber
client so you can interoperate between
Windows and Mac or Linux so this is
going to be I think a huge hit and the
enterprise is a highly requested feature
other features that are included in
Tiger X grid 10 is supported so for
turnkey grid computing for applications
that are amenable to it you can spread
it around your network on servers or
clients I think that's going to find a
wide amount of use in the enterprise as
I mentioned it's already being widely
used in the scientific and academic
community small office home up is set up
so easy out of the box set up for a
small office or home office ackles
support access control list and mobile
home directories so that you can from
from a powerbook think your home
directory with the direct round of disc
take your powerbook come back and as i
mentioned over 250 other features over
100 open source projects so again we're
continuing to leverage open source into
the product focusing our innovation on
making it easy to use easy to manage
easy to deploy a need to develop for
going to be available in the first half
of 2005 and you all get a copy of mac OS
10 server preview release developer
preview release for coming to the
conference so thank you very much
I just want to mention before you go we
have a lot of great things that you
should be a 10 other sessions you should
be attending some of them are listed up
here apple and scientific computing mac
OS x server update i especially want to
mention on wednesday there's an oracle a
session with tom kite those of you who
know appt tom and familiar with oracle
you got to go see Tom give a talk about
oracle on mac OS 10 x or afraid apple
design awards etc so thank you very much
[Applause]